README.md, before:

<h1>
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f7d26ac0-6d4c-4d66-9a4c-046158b20d24" alt="Logo" width="128">
  <br>lla
</h1>

<p align="center">
    Modern, customizable, feature-rich and extensible `ls` replacement.
    <br />
   <br />
    <a href="https://lla.chaqchase.com">Documentation</a>
    ·
    <a href="#features">Features</a>
    ·
    <a href="#installation">Installation</a>
    ·
    <a href="#display-formats">Display Formats</a>
    ·
    <a href="#command-reference">Command Reference</a>
  </p>
</p>

## Overview

lla is a modern `ls` replacement that transforms how developers interact with their filesystem. Built with Rust's performance capabilities and designed with user experience in mind, lla combines the familiarity of `ls` with powerful features like specialized views, Git integration, and a robust plugin system with an extensible list of plugins to add more functionality.

## Features

- Multiple Views: Default clean view, long format, tree structure, table layout, grid display
- Git Integration: Built-in status visualization and repository insights
- Advanced Organization: Timeline view, storage analysis, recursive exploration
- Smart Search: complex filtering patterns (OR, AND, NOT, XOR), regex support
- Customization: Plugin system, theme manager, custom shortcuts, configurable display
- High Performance: Built with Rust, modern UI, clean listings
- Smart Sorting: Multiple criteria, directory-first option, natural sorting
- Flexible Config: Easy initialization, plugin management, configuration tools
- Rich Plugin Ecosystem: File ops and metadata enhancements, code analysis, git tools, and more

## Installation

### Using Package Manager

| Package Manager / Platform | Command             |
| -------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Cargo                      | `cargo install lla` |
| macOS (Homebrew)           | `brew install lla`  |
| Arch Linux (paru)          | `paru -S lla`       |
| NetBSD (pkgin)             | `pkgin install lla` |

### Manual Installation

```bash
# Manual - Example is for amd64 GNU, replaces the file names if downloading for a different arch.
wget -c https://github.com/triyanox/lla/releases/download/<version>/<lla-<os>-<arch>> -O lla # Example /v0.3.9/lla-linux-amd64
sudo chmod +x lla
sudo chown root:root lla
sudo mv lla /usr/local/bin/lla
```

### Post Installation

After installation, initialize your setup:

```bash
# Create default config
lla init

# View your config
lla config
```

[![Packaging status](https://repology.org/badge/vertical-allrepos/lla-ls.svg)](https://repology.org/project/lla-ls/versions)

## Display Formats

### Core Views

#### Default View

Clean, distraction-free listing for quick directory scans:

```bash
lla
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3517c63c-f4ec-4a51-ab6d-46a0ed7918f8" className="rounded-2xl" alt="default" />

#### Long Format

Rich metadata display for detailed file analysis:

```bash
lla -l
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2a8d95e4-efd2-4bff-a905-9d9a892dc794" className="rounded-2xl" alt="long" />

#### Tree Structure

Hierarchical exploration of directory relationships:

```bash
lla -t -d 3  # Navigate up to 3 levels deep
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cb32bfbb-eeb1-4701-889d-f3d42c7d4896" className="rounded-2xl" alt="tree" />

### Enhanced Organization

#### Table Layout

Structured view optimized for data comparison:

```bash
lla -T
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9f1d6d97-4074-4480-b242-a6a2eace4b38" className="rounded-2xl" alt="table" />

#### Grid Display

Space-efficient layout for dense directories:

```bash
lla -g
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b81d01ea-b830-4833-8791-7b62ff9137df" className="rounded-2xl" alt="grid" />

### Specialized Views

#### Git Integration

Smart repository insights:

```bash
lla -G
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b0654b20-c37d-45c2-9fd0-f3399fce385e" className="rounded-2xl" alt="git" />

#### Timeline Organization

Chronological file tracking:

```bash
lla --timeline
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/06a156a7-628a-4948-b75c-a0da584c9224" className="rounded-2xl" alt="timeline" />

#### Storage Analysis

Visual disk usage insights:

```bash
lla -S # use --include-dirs to calculate directories sizes
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dad703ec-ef23-460b-9b9c-b5c5d6595300" className="rounded-2xl" alt="sizemap" />

### Advanced Navigation

#### Fuzzy Search (Experimental)

Interactive file discovery:

```bash
lla --fuzzy
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/736ba11b-d2e8-4ac7-8bdb-9746f250a3a8" className="rounded-2xl" alt="fuzzy" />

#### Deep Directory Exploration (Recursive)

Comprehensive subdirectory listing:

```bash
lla -R
lla -R -d 3  # Set exploration depth
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f8fa0901-8866-4b92-a76e-3b7fd307f04e" className="rounded-2xl" alt="recursive" />

The `-R` option can be integrated with other options to create a more specific view. For example, `lla -R -l`
will show a detailed listing of all files and directories in the current directory.

## Command Reference

### Display Options

#### Basic Views

| Command   | Short | Description                             | Example  |
| --------- | ----- | --------------------------------------- | -------- |
| (default) |       | List current directory                  | `lla`    |
| `--long`  | `-l`  | Detailed file information with metadata | `lla -l` |
| `--tree`  | `-t`  | Hierarchical directory visualization    | `lla -t` |
| `--table` | `-T`  | Structured data display                 | `lla -T` |
| `--grid`  | `-g`  | Organized grid layout                   | `lla -g` |

#### Advanced Views

| Command       | Short | Description                             | Example                               |
| ------------- | ----- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `--sizemap`   | `-S`  | Visual representation of file sizes     | `lla -S` <br> `lla -S --include-dirs` |
| `--timeline`  |       | Group files by time periods             | `lla --timeline`                      |
| `--git`       | `-G`  | Show git status and information         | `lla -G`                              |
| `--fuzzy`     | `-F`  | Interactive fuzzy finder (Experimental) | `lla --fuzzy`                         |
| `--recursive` | `-R`  | Recursive listing format                | `lla -R` <br> `lla -R -d 3`           |

#### Display Modifiers

| Command      | Description                          | Example          |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------ | ---------------- |
| `--icons`    | Show icons for files and directories | `lla --icons`    |
| `--no-icons` | Hide icons for files and directories | `lla --no-icons` |
| `--no-color` | Disable all colors in the output     | `lla --no-color` |

### Sort & Filter Options

#### Sorting

| Command                 | Short | Description                                  | Example                                             |
| ----------------------- | ----- | -------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `--sort`                | `-s`  | Sort files by criteria                       | `lla -s name` <br> `lla -s size` <br> `lla -s date` |
| `--sort-reverse`        | `-r`  | Reverse the sort order                       | `lla -s size -r`                                    |
| `--sort-dirs-first`     |       | List directories before files                | `lla --sort-dirs-first`                             |
| `--sort-case-sensitive` |       | Enable case-sensitive sorting                | `lla --sort-case-sensitive`                         |
| `--sort-natural`        |       | Natural number sorting (2.txt before 10.txt) | `lla --sort-natural`                                |

#### Basic Filtering

| Command            | Short | Description                     | Example                             |
| ------------------ | ----- | ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `--filter`         | `-f`  | Filter files by pattern         | `lla -f "test"` <br> `lla -f ".rs"` |
| `--case-sensitive` | `-c`  | Enable case-sensitive filtering | `lla -f "test" -c`                  |
| `--depth`          | `-d`  | Set the depth for tree listing  | `lla -t -d 3` <br> `lla -d 2`       |

#### Advanced Filtering Patterns

| Filter Type        | Example                       | Description                                    |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| OR Operation       | `lla -f "test,spec"`          | Match files containing either "test" or "spec" |
| AND Operation      | `lla -f "+test,api"`          | Match files containing both "test" and "api"   |
| Regular Expression | `lla -f "regex:^test.*\.rs$"` | Rust files starting with "test"                |
| Glob Pattern       | `lla -f "glob:*.{rs,toml}"`   | Match .rs or .toml files                       |
| Composite AND      | `lla -f "test AND .rs"`       | Logical AND operation                          |
| Composite OR       | `lla -f "test OR spec"`       | Logical OR operation                           |
| Composite NOT      | `lla -f "NOT test"`           | Logical NOT operation                          |
| Composite XOR      | `lla -f "test XOR spec"`      | Logical XOR operation                          |

### View Filters

#### Show Only Filters

| Command           | Description                         | Example               |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------- | --------------------- |
| `--dirs-only`     | Show only directories               | `lla --dirs-only`     |
| `--files-only`    | Show only regular files             | `lla --files-only`    |
| `--symlinks-only` | Show only symbolic links            | `lla --symlinks-only` |
| `--dotfiles-only` | Show only dot files and directories | `lla --dotfiles-only` |

#### Hide Filters

| Command         | Description                    | Example             |
| --------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------- |
| `--no-dirs`     | Hide directories               | `lla --no-dirs`     |
| `--no-files`    | Hide regular files             | `lla --no-files`    |
| `--no-symlinks` | Hide symbolic links            | `lla --no-symlinks` |
| `--no-dotfiles` | Hide dot files and directories | `lla --no-dotfiles` |

#### Combined Filters

| Description                                  | Example                           |
| -------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| Show only dot directories                    | `lla --dirs-only --dotfiles-only` |
| Show only regular files, excluding dot files | `lla --files-only --no-dotfiles`  |

### Plugin Management

#### Installation

| Command         | Description                  | Example                                            |
| --------------- | ---------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `install --git` | Install from Git repository  | `lla install --git https://github.com/user/plugin` |
| `install --dir` | Install from local directory | `lla install --dir path/to/plugin`                 |

#### Plugin Controls

| Command            | Description                | Example                                                                       |
| ------------------ | -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `use`              | Interactive plugin manager | `lla use`                                                                     |
| `--enable-plugin`  | Enable specific plugins    | `lla --enable-plugin name`                                                    |
| `--disable-plugin` | Disable specific plugins   | `lla --disable-plugin name`                                                   |
| `update`           | Update plugins             | `lla update` <br> `lla update file_tagger`                                    |
| `plugin`           | Run plugin actions         | `lla plugin --name file_tagger --action add-tag --args README.md "important"` |

#### Shortcut Management

| Command           | Description        | Example                                                           |
| ----------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `shortcut add`    | Add a new shortcut | `lla shortcut add find file_finder search -d "Quick file search"` |
| `shortcut remove` | Remove a shortcut  | `lla shortcut remove find`                                        |
| `shortcut list`   | List all shortcuts | `lla shortcut list`                                               |

### Configuration & Setup

| Command      | Description                       | Example               |
| ------------ | --------------------------------- | --------------------- |
| `init`       | Initialize the configuration file | `lla init`            |
| `config`     | View or modify configuration      | `lla config`          |
| `theme`      | Interactive theme manager         | `lla theme`           |
| `completion` | Generate shell completion scripts | `lla completion bash` |
| `clean`      | Clean up invalid plugins          | `lla clean`           |

### General Options

| Command     | Short | Description               |
| ----------- | ----- | ------------------------- |
| `--help`    | `-h`  | Print help information    |
| `--version` | `-V`  | Print version information |

> **Note**
> For detailed usage and examples of each command, visit the [lla documentation](https://lla.chaqchase.com).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

feat: add installation script for lla

README.md, after:

<h1>
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f7d26ac0-6d4c-4d66-9a4c-046158b20d24" alt="Logo" width="128">
  <br>lla
</h1>

<p align="center">
    Modern, customizable, feature-rich and extensible `ls` replacement.
    <br />
   <br />
    <a href="https://lla.chaqchase.com">Documentation</a>
    ·
    <a href="#features">Features</a>
    ·
    <a href="#installation">Installation</a>
    ·
    <a href="#display-formats">Display Formats</a>
    ·
    <a href="#command-reference">Command Reference</a>
  </p>
</p>

## Overview

lla is a modern `ls` replacement that transforms how developers interact with their filesystem. Built with Rust's performance capabilities and designed with user experience in mind, lla combines the familiarity of `ls` with powerful features like specialized views, Git integration, and a robust plugin system with an extensible list of plugins to add more functionality.

## Features

- Multiple Views: Default clean view, long format, tree structure, table layout, grid display
- Git Integration: Built-in status visualization and repository insights
- Advanced Organization: Timeline view, storage analysis, recursive exploration
- Smart Search: complex filtering patterns (OR, AND, NOT, XOR), regex support
- Customization: Plugin system, theme manager, custom shortcuts, configurable display
- High Performance: Built with Rust, modern UI, clean listings
- Smart Sorting: Multiple criteria, directory-first option, natural sorting
- Flexible Config: Easy initialization, plugin management, configuration tools
- Rich Plugin Ecosystem: File ops and metadata enhancements, code analysis, git tools, and more

## Installation

### Using Installation Script

The easiest way to install lla is using our installation script:

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/chaqchase/lla/main/install.sh | bash
```

This script will automatically:

- Detect your OS and architecture
- Download the appropriate binary
- Verify the checksum
- Install lla to `/usr/local/bin`

### Using Package Manager

| Package Manager / Platform | Command             |
| -------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Cargo                      | `cargo install lla` |
| macOS (Homebrew)           | `brew install lla`  |
| Arch Linux (paru)          | `paru -S lla`       |
| NetBSD (pkgin)             | `pkgin install lla` |

### Manual Installation

```bash
# Manual - Example is for amd64 GNU, replaces the file names if downloading for a different arch.
wget -c https://github.com/triyanox/lla/releases/download/<version>/<lla-<os>-<arch>> -O lla # Example /v0.3.9/lla-linux-amd64
sudo chmod +x lla
sudo chown root:root lla
sudo mv lla /usr/local/bin/lla
```

### Post Installation

After installation, initialize your setup:

```bash
# Create default config
lla init

# View your config
lla config
```

[![Packaging status](https://repology.org/badge/vertical-allrepos/lla-ls.svg)](https://repology.org/project/lla-ls/versions)

## Display Formats

### Core Views

#### Default View

Clean, distraction-free listing for quick directory scans:

```bash
lla
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3517c63c-f4ec-4a51-ab6d-46a0ed7918f8" className="rounded-2xl" alt="default" />

#### Long Format

Rich metadata display for detailed file analysis:

```bash
lla -l
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2a8d95e4-efd2-4bff-a905-9d9a892dc794" className="rounded-2xl" alt="long" />

#### Tree Structure

Hierarchical exploration of directory relationships:

```bash
lla -t -d 3  # Navigate up to 3 levels deep
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cb32bfbb-eeb1-4701-889d-f3d42c7d4896" className="rounded-2xl" alt="tree" />

### Enhanced Organization

#### Table Layout

Structured view optimized for data comparison:

```bash
lla -T
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9f1d6d97-4074-4480-b242-a6a2eace4b38" className="rounded-2xl" alt="table" />

#### Grid Display

Space-efficient layout for dense directories:

```bash
lla -g
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b81d01ea-b830-4833-8791-7b62ff9137df" className="rounded-2xl" alt="grid" />

### Specialized Views

#### Git Integration

Smart repository insights:

```bash
lla -G
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b0654b20-c37d-45c2-9fd0-f3399fce385e" className="rounded-2xl" alt="git" />

#### Timeline Organization

Chronological file tracking:

```bash
lla --timeline
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/06a156a7-628a-4948-b75c-a0da584c9224" className="rounded-2xl" alt="timeline" />

#### Storage Analysis

Visual disk usage insights:

```bash
lla -S # use --include-dirs to calculate directories sizes
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dad703ec-ef23-460b-9b9c-b5c5d6595300" className="rounded-2xl" alt="sizemap" />

### Advanced Navigation

#### Fuzzy Search (Experimental)

Interactive file discovery:

```bash
lla --fuzzy
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/736ba11b-d2e8-4ac7-8bdb-9746f250a3a8" className="rounded-2xl" alt="fuzzy" />

#### Deep Directory Exploration (Recursive)

Comprehensive subdirectory listing:

```bash
lla -R
lla -R -d 3  # Set exploration depth
```

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f8fa0901-8866-4b92-a76e-3b7fd307f04e" className="rounded-2xl" alt="recursive" />

The `-R` option can be integrated with other options to create a more specific view. For example, `lla -R -l`
will show a detailed listing of all files and directories in the current directory.

## Command Reference

### Display Options

#### Basic Views

| Command   | Short | Description                             | Example  |
| --------- | ----- | --------------------------------------- | -------- |
| (default) |       | List current directory                  | `lla`    |
| `--long`  | `-l`  | Detailed file information with metadata | `lla -l` |
| `--tree`  | `-t`  | Hierarchical directory visualization    | `lla -t` |
| `--table` | `-T`  | Structured data display                 | `lla -T` |
| `--grid`  | `-g`  | Organized grid layout                   | `lla -g` |

#### Advanced Views

| Command       | Short | Description                             | Example                               |
| ------------- | ----- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `--sizemap`   | `-S`  | Visual representation of file sizes     | `lla -S` <br> `lla -S --include-dirs` |
| `--timeline`  |       | Group files by time periods             | `lla --timeline`                      |
| `--git`       | `-G`  | Show git status and information         | `lla -G`                              |
| `--fuzzy`     | `-F`  | Interactive fuzzy finder (Experimental) | `lla --fuzzy`                         |
| `--recursive` | `-R`  | Recursive listing format                | `lla -R` <br> `lla -R -d 3`           |

#### Display Modifiers

| Command      | Description                          | Example          |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------ | ---------------- |
| `--icons`    | Show icons for files and directories | `lla --icons`    |
| `--no-icons` | Hide icons for files and directories | `lla --no-icons` |
| `--no-color` | Disable all colors in the output     | `lla --no-color` |

### Sort & Filter Options

#### Sorting

| Command                 | Short | Description                                  | Example                                             |
| ----------------------- | ----- | -------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `--sort`                | `-s`  | Sort files by criteria                       | `lla -s name` <br> `lla -s size` <br> `lla -s date` |
| `--sort-reverse`        | `-r`  | Reverse the sort order                       | `lla -s size -r`                                    |
| `--sort-dirs-first`     |       | List directories before files                | `lla --sort-dirs-first`                             |
| `--sort-case-sensitive` |       | Enable case-sensitive sorting                | `lla --sort-case-sensitive`                         |
| `--sort-natural`        |       | Natural number sorting (2.txt before 10.txt) | `lla --sort-natural`                                |

#### Basic Filtering

| Command            | Short | Description                     | Example                             |
| ------------------ | ----- | ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `--filter`         | `-f`  | Filter files by pattern         | `lla -f "test"` <br> `lla -f ".rs"` |
| `--case-sensitive` | `-c`  | Enable case-sensitive filtering | `lla -f "test" -c`                  |
| `--depth`          | `-d`  | Set the depth for tree listing  | `lla -t -d 3` <br> `lla -d 2`       |

#### Advanced Filtering Patterns

| Filter Type        | Example                       | Description                                    |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| OR Operation       | `lla -f "test,spec"`          | Match files containing either "test" or "spec" |
| AND Operation      | `lla -f "+test,api"`          | Match files containing both "test" and "api"   |
| Regular Expression | `lla -f "regex:^test.*\.rs$"` | Rust files starting with "test"                |
| Glob Pattern       | `lla -f "glob:*.{rs,toml}"`   | Match .rs or .toml files                       |
| Composite AND      | `lla -f "test AND .rs"`       | Logical AND operation                          |
| Composite OR       | `lla -f "test OR spec"`       | Logical OR operation                           |
| Composite NOT      | `lla -f "NOT test"`           | Logical NOT operation                          |
| Composite XOR      | `lla -f "test XOR spec"`      | Logical XOR operation                          |

### View Filters

#### Show Only Filters

| Command           | Description                         | Example               |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------- | --------------------- |
| `--dirs-only`     | Show only directories               | `lla --dirs-only`     |
| `--files-only`    | Show only regular files             | `lla --files-only`    |
| `--symlinks-only` | Show only symbolic links            | `lla --symlinks-only` |
| `--dotfiles-only` | Show only dot files and directories | `lla --dotfiles-only` |

#### Hide Filters

| Command         | Description                    | Example             |
| --------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------- |
| `--no-dirs`     | Hide directories               | `lla --no-dirs`     |
| `--no-files`    | Hide regular files             | `lla --no-files`    |
| `--no-symlinks` | Hide symbolic links            | `lla --no-symlinks` |
| `--no-dotfiles` | Hide dot files and directories | `lla --no-dotfiles` |

#### Combined Filters

| Description                                  | Example                           |
| -------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| Show only dot directories                    | `lla --dirs-only --dotfiles-only` |
| Show only regular files, excluding dot files | `lla --files-only --no-dotfiles`  |

### Plugin Management

#### Installation

| Command         | Description                  | Example                                            |
| --------------- | ---------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `install --git` | Install from Git repository  | `lla install --git https://github.com/user/plugin` |
| `install --dir` | Install from local directory | `lla install --dir path/to/plugin`                 |

#### Plugin Controls

| Command            | Description                | Example                                                                       |
| ------------------ | -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `use`              | Interactive plugin manager | `lla use`                                                                     |
| `--enable-plugin`  | Enable specific plugins    | `lla --enable-plugin name`                                                    |
| `--disable-plugin` | Disable specific plugins   | `lla --disable-plugin name`                                                   |
| `update`           | Update plugins             | `lla update` <br> `lla update file_tagger`                                    |
| `plugin`           | Run plugin actions         | `lla plugin --name file_tagger --action add-tag --args README.md "important"` |

#### Shortcut Management

| Command           | Description        | Example                                                           |
| ----------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `shortcut add`    | Add a new shortcut | `lla shortcut add find file_finder search -d "Quick file search"` |
| `shortcut remove` | Remove a shortcut  | `lla shortcut remove find`                                        |
| `shortcut list`   | List all shortcuts | `lla shortcut list`                                               |

### Configuration & Setup

| Command      | Description                       | Example               |
| ------------ | --------------------------------- | --------------------- |
| `init`       | Initialize the configuration file | `lla init`            |
| `config`     | View or modify configuration      | `lla config`          |
| `theme`      | Interactive theme manager         | `lla theme`           |
| `completion` | Generate shell completion scripts | `lla completion bash` |
| `clean`      | Clean up invalid plugins          | `lla clean`           |

### General Options

| Command     | Short | Description               |
| ----------- | ----- | ------------------------- |
| `--help`    | `-h`  | Print help information    |
| `--version` | `-V`  | Print version information |

> **Note**
> For detailed usage and examples of each command, visit the [lla documentation](https://lla.chaqchase.com).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
